[Docs] Tokenomics Documentation (#750)
pokt-network/poktroll: docusaurus/docs/protocol/tokenomics/token_logic_modules.md

much more, but that is out of scope for the initial implementation.

:::

```mermaid
---
title: "Token Logic Modules (pre) Processing"
---
flowchart TB
    CSA(["Claim Settlement Amount (CSA)"])
    MCA(["MaxClaimPerSupplier (MCA) <br> = (AppStake / NumSuppliersPerSession)"])
    CC{"Is CSA > MCA?"}
    Update(Set SA = MCA <br>Broadcast Event)
    SOAE{{Application Overserviced <br> Event}}
    TLMP[["TLM Processor (SA)"]]

    CSA -- CSA --> CC
    MCA -- MCA --> CC

    Update -..-> SOAE
    CC -- Yes --> Update
    CC -- No<br>SA=CSA --> TLMP
    Update -- SA=CSA --> TLMP

    TLMP --SA--> TLMBEM[[TLM: Burn Equals Mint]]
    TLMP --SA--> TLMGI[[TLM: Global Inflation]]
    TLMP --SA--> TLMGIRR[[TLM: Global Inflation Reimbursement Request]]

    classDef tlm fill:#54ebd5,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    classDef question fill:#e3db6d,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    classDef event fill:#e8b761,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;

    class TLMP,TLMBEM,TLMGI,TLMGIRR tlm;
    class SOAE event;
    class CC question;
```

## TLM: Mint=Burn (MEB)

> _tl;dr The transfer of tokens from the application to the supplier based on the amount of work received and provided respectively.._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_tl;dr The transfer of tokens from the applications to the suppliers based on the amount of work received and provided respectively._
```

(pluralize actors)

> The `Mint=Burn` TLM is, _theoretically_, the only TLM necessary when the network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Mint=Burn` TLM is, _theoretically_, the only TLM necessary after the network
```

OR

```suggestion
The `Mint=Burn` TLM is, _theoretically_, the only TLM necessary once the network
```

> reaches equilibrium in the far future.

Reviewer: What's "reaching equilibrium", supply/demand?

Author: `reaches maturity in the far future.`

> The same amount of tokens that is minted in the **supplier module** is burned from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same amount of tokens that is minted to the **supplier module** is burned from
```

> the **application module**. The stake of the application paying for work is reduced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the **application module**. The stake owned by the application which is paying for work is reduced
```

OR

```suggestion
the **application module**. The stake (in escrow) owned the application which is paying for work is reduced
```

---
flowchart TB
    CSA(["Claim Settlement Amount (CSA)"])
    MCA(["MaxClaimPerSupplier (MCA) <br> = (AppStake / NumSuppliersPerSession)"])
    CC{"Is CSA > MCA?"}
    Update(Broadcast Event <br> that SA = MCA)
    SOAE{{Application Overserviced <br> Event}}
    TLMP("Process TLMs (SA)")

    CSA -- CSA --> CC
    MCA -- MCA --> CC

    Update -..-> SOAE
    CC -- Yes --> Update
    CC -- No<br>SA=CSA --> TLMP
    Update -- SA=CSA --> TLMP

    TLMP --SA--> TLMBEM[[TLM: Burn Equals Mint]]
    TLMP --SA--> TLMGI[[TLM: Global Inflation]]
    TLMP --SA--> TLMGIRR[[TLM: Global Inflation Reimbursement Request]]

    classDef tlm fill:#54ebd5,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    classDef question fill:#e3db6d,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    classDef event fill:#e8b761,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;

    class TLMBEM,TLMGI,TLMGIRR tlm;
    class SOAE event;
    class CC question;
```

## TLM: Mint=Burn (MEB)

_tl;dr The transfer of tokens from the applications to the suppliers based on the amount of work received and provided respectively._

The `Mint=Burn` TLM is, _theoretically_, the only TLM necessary once the network
reaches maturity in the far future.

> The same amount of tokens that is minted to the **supplier module** is burned from

Author: Nice

_tl;dr Max Claimable Amount ∝ (Application Stake / Number of Suppliers per Session)_

Per **Algorithm 1** of the [Relay Mining paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2305.10672),
the maximum amount a supplier can claim from an application in a single session is
proportional to the Application's stake divided by the number of suppliers in the session.

This is referred to as "Relay Mining Payable Relay Accumulation" in the paper and
is described by the following pseudo-code:

![Algorithm 1](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d1a61535-aa31-447d-88ea-c8d14dcb20c6)

## TLM (pre) Processing

_tl;dr Determine if the claim settlement amount is greater than the maximum claimable amount prior to running each individual TLM._

**Prior to** processing each individual TLM, we need to understand if the amount claimed
by the supplier adheres to the optimistic maxima set per the limits of the Relay Mining algorithm.

Suppliers always have the option to over-service an application (**i.e. do free work**),
in order to ensure high quality service in the network. This may lead to offchain
reputation benefits (e.g. Gateways favoring them), but suppliers' on-chain rewards

> are always limited by the cumulative amounts applications' stakes (at session start; per service)

Reviewer 2: > per service

To have a `Maximum Claimable Amount` that mitigates the `Application`s stake to go negative; its stake needs to be **per service**

Otherwise `Application`s will still be able to over-service across different `Services` and getting more work done (beyond the _Relay Accuracy_ parameter) than what their stake permits.

If `Maximum Claimable Amount` does not enforce this, I don't see how it could be useful.

Author: Great callout!

and the number of suppliers in the session.

:::note

TODO_POST_MAINNET: After the Shannon upgrade, the team at Grove has a lot of ideas
related to on-chain reputation, [supplier overlay networks](https://www.notion.so/buildwithgrove/Off-chain-Application-Stake-Tracking-6a8bebb107db4f7f9dc62cbe7ba555f7?pvs=4), and
much more, all of which is out of scope for the initial implementation.

:::

```mermaid
---
title: "Token Logic Modules (pre) Processing"
---
flowchart TB
    CSA(["Claim Settlement Amount (CSA)"])
    MCA(["MaxClaimPerSupplier (MCA) <br> = (AppStake / NumSuppliersPerSession)"])
    CC{"Is CSA > MCA?"}
    Update(Broadcast Event <br> that SA = MCA)
    SOAE{{Application Overserviced <br> Event}}
    TLMP("Process TLMs (SA)")

    CSA -- CSA --> CC
    MCA -- MCA --> CC

    Update -..-> SOAE
    CC -- Yes --> Update
    CC -- No<br>SA=CSA --> TLMP
    Update -- SA=CSA --> TLMP

    TLMP --SA--> TLMBEM[[TLM: Burn Equals Mint]]
    TLMP --SA--> TLMGI[[TLM: Global Inflation]]
    TLMP --SA--> TLMGIRR[[TLM: Global Inflation Reimbursement Request]]

>     classDef tlm fill:#54ebd5,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
>     classDef question fill:#e3db6d,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
>     classDef event fill:#e8b761,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    classDef tlm fill:#54ebd5,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px,color:#333;
    classDef question fill:#e3db6d,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px,color:#333;
    classDef event fill:#e8b761,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px,color:#333;
```

It's worth checking the rendering of the charts both in light and dark modes :)

    class TLMBEM,TLMGI,TLMGIRR tlm;
    class SOAE event;
    class CC question;
```

## TLM: Mint=Burn (MEB)

_tl;dr The transfer of tokens from the applications to the suppliers based on the amount of work received and provided respectively._

The `Mint=Burn` TLM is, _theoretically_, the only TLM necessary once the network
reaches maturity in the far future.

The same number of tokens minted to the **supplier module** is burned from
the **application module**. The stake (in escrow) owned by the application which is

> paying for work is reduced and the rewards are distributed to the supplier and its

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
paying for work is reduced and the rewards are distributed to the suppliers and their
```

revenue shareholder addresses.

```mermaid
---
title: "Token Logic Module: Mint=Burn"
---
flowchart TD
    SA(["Settlement Amount (SA)"])

    SA -- Mint SA coins --> SM
    SA -- Burn SA coins--> AM

    subgraph SO[Supplier Operations]
        SM[[Supplier Module]]
        SK[(Supplier Keeper)]
        SD{Distribute SA coins}
        RSA[Other Revenue Share Addresses]

        SM -.- SK
        SK -. Burn if proof <br> is missing or invalid .-> OA

>         SD -->|% Distribution <br> Increase Balance| OA

Reviewer 2: I would remove `OA` and `OPA` from distribution increase balance.

While some configurations distribute to them, it's not always the case. Reward distribution always looks at the shareholders list.

Author: Please TAL at the updated diagrams. Made a significant number of changes.

        SD -->|% Distribution <br> Increase Balance| RSH1
        SD -->|% Distribution <br> Increase Balance| RSH2
        SD -->|% Distribution <br> Increase Balance| OPA

        subgraph RSA[Revenue Share Addresses]
            OA[Owner Address]
            OPA[Operator Address]
            RSH1[Revenue shareholder 1]
            RSH2[Revenue shareholder 2]
        end
    end

    subgraph AO[Application Operations]
        AM[[Application Module]]
        AK[(Application Keeper)]
        AA[Application Address]

        AM -.- AK
        AK -. Reduce Stake by SA .-> AA
        AA -.- TODO{See TODO below}
    end

    SM --> SD

>     classDef module fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
>     classDef address fill:#bbf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
>     classDef question fill:#e3db6d,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
>     classDef event fill:#e8b761,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    classDef module fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px,color:#333;
    classDef address fill:#bbf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px,color:#333;
    classDef question fill:#e3db6d,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px,color:#333;
    classDef event fill:#e8b761,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px,color:#333;
```

    class SM,AM module;
    class RSH1,RSH2,OA,OPA,AA address;
    class TODO question;
```

:::note

TODO_MAINNET: If the application stake has dropped to (near?) zero, should
we unstake it? Should we use it's balance? Should their be a payee of last resort?
Make sure to document whatever decision we come to.

:::

## TLM: Global Mint (GM)

> _tl;dr Distributed newly minted coins on a per claim basis to all involved stakeholders._

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_tl;dr Distribute newly minted coins on a per claim basis to all involved stakeholders._
```

> The `Global Mint` TLM is, _theoretically_, going to reach `zero`the only when the network

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Global Mint` TLM is, _theoretically_, going to reach `zero` when the network
```

reaches maturity in the far future.

> On a per claim basis, the network mints new tokens based on the the amount of work

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On a per claim basis, the network mints new tokens based on the amount of work
```

> claimed. The newly minted tokens are distributed to the supplier, DAO, service owner

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
claimed. The newly minted tokens are distributed to the supplier's shareholders, DAO, service owner
```

> and application based on the values of various governance params.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
proposer, and application based on the values of various governance params.
```

```mermaid
---
title: "Token Logic Module: Global Mint"
---
flowchart TD
    SC(["Settlement Amount Coins (SA)"])
    PCI(["Per Claim Global Inflation <br> (Governance Parameter)"])
    IMC(["Inflation Mint Coins (IMC)"])

    DA(["DAO Mint Allocation"])
    PA(["Proposer Mint Allocation"])
    SA(["Supplier Mint Allocation"])
    SOM(["Source Owner Mint Allocation"])
    AA(["Application Mint Allocation"])

    SC --> IMC
    PCI --> IMC
    IMC --> TO

    subgraph TO[Tokenomics Operations]
        TM[[Tokenomics Module]]
        TK[(Tokenomics Keeper)]
        TM -..- TK
    end

    AA --> ID
    DA --> ID
    TO --Distribute Inflation (IMC)--> ID
    PA --> ID
    SOM --> ID
    SA --> ID

    subgraph ID[Inflation Distribution]

>         DI["Distribute Inflation (IMC)"]

Reviewer: I typo'd the brackets, meant to suggest:

```suggestion
        DI{"Distribute Inflation (IMC)"}
```

        APPA["Application Address"]

>         SPPA["Supplier Address"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        SPPA["Supplier's Shareholder Addresses"]
```

        DAOA["DAO Address"]
        SOA["Service Owner Address"]
        PRA["Proposer Address"]

        DI -->|% Mint Allocation| APPA
        DI -->|% Mint Allocation| DAOA
        DI -->|% Mint Allocation| PRA
        DI -->|% Mint Allocation| SOA
        DI -->|% Mint Allocation| SPPA
    end

    classDef module fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    classDef address fill:#bbf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    classDef question fill:#e3db6d,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    classDef govparam fill:#eba69a,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    classDef event fill:#e8b761,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;

    class TM module;
    class PCI,DA,PA,SA,SOM,AA govparam;
    class APPA,SPPA,DAOA,SOA,PRA address;
```

## TLM: Global Mint Reimbursement Request (GMRR)

> _tl;dr Prevent self-dealing by over-charging applications, sending the excess to the DAO/PNF, and emitting an event as a reimbursement request._

Reviewer 2: Could we charge the suppliers instead? If I'm understanding GMRR correctly this is possible.

It has the benefit of dealing with `Supplier`s which are more likely to be known and less prone to appear/disappear over time.

Author: We could but then we're getting into less Morse parity and more "why are you changing everything land."

We'll dive deeper into this int he coming months.

> This TLM is a dependency of the Global Mint TLM; i.e., it **MUST** be active if Global Mint is active.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This TLM is a dependency of the Global Mint TLM; i.e., it **MUST** be active only if Global Mint is active.
```

This TLM can, **theoretically**, be removed if self-dealing attacks are not a concern,
or if the global mint per claim governance parameter is set to zero.

> The goal of the TLM is to overcharge applications equal to the global inflation amount

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The goal of the TLM is to overcharge applications an amount equal to the global inflation
```

and send those funds to the DAO/PNF. This forces potentially self-dealing gateways to
"show face" in front of the DAO/PNF and request reimbursement.

The event emitted creates an easy, onchain mechanism, to track reimbursement handled offchain.

A side effect of this TLM is creating additional buy pressure of the token as Applications
and Gateways will be responsible for frequently "topping up" their balances and app stakes.

```mermaid
---
title: "Token Logic Module: Global Mint Reimbursement Request"
---
flowchart TD
    SC(["Settlement Coin (SC)"])
    PCI(["Per Claim Global Inflation <br> (Governance Parameter)"])
    IMC(["Inflation Mint Coin (IMC)"])
    ARRE{{Application Reimbursement <br> Request Event}}

    SC --> IMC
    PCI --> IMC
    IMC --IMC--> AO

    subgraph AO[Application Operations]
        AM[[Application Module]]
        AK[(Application Keeper)]
        AA[Application Address]
        DA[DAO Address]

        AM -.- AK
        AK -. Reduce Stake by IMC .-> AA
        AM -..-> |Increase Balance by IMC| DA
    end

    AO -. Emit Event.-> ARRE

>     classDef module fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
>     classDef address fill:#bbf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
>     classDef question fill:#e3db6d,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
>     classDef govparam fill:#d04a36,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
>     classDef event fill:#e8b761,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    classDef module fill:#f9f, color: #333, stroke:#333, stroke-width:2px;
    classDef address fill:#bbf, color: #333, stroke:#333, stroke-width:2px;
    classDef question fill:#e3db6d, color: #333, stroke:#333, stroke-width:2px;
    classDef govparam fill:#eba69a, color: #333, stroke:#333, stroke-width:2px;
    classDef event fill:#e8b761, color: #333, stroke:#333, stroke-width:2px;
```

    classDef event fill:#e8b761,color: #333,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;

    class TLMBEM,TLMGI,TLMGIRR,TLMO tlm;
    class SOAE event;
    class CC question;
```

:::note

TODO_POST_MAINNET: After the Shannon upgrade, the team at Grove has a lot of ideas
related to on-chain reputation, [supplier overlay networks](https://www.notion.so/buildwithgrove/Off-chain-Application-Stake-Tracking-6a8bebb107db4f7f9dc62cbe7ba555f7?pvs=4), and
much more, all of which is out of scope for the initial implementation.

:::

## TLM: Mint=Burn (MEB)

_tl;dr The transfer of tokens from the applications to the suppliers based on the amount of work received and provided respectively._

The `Mint=Burn` TLM is, _theoretically_, the only TLM necessary once the network
reaches maturity in the far future.

The same number of tokens minted to the **Supplier module** is burned from
the **Application module**. The stake (in escrow) owned by the application which is
paying for work is reduced and the rewards are distributed to the suppliers and their
revenue shareholder addresses.

```mermaid
---
title: "Token Logic Module: Mint=Burn"
---
flowchart TD
    SA(["Settlement Amount (SA)"])

>     SA -- 💲 MINT SA coins --> SM

Reviewer 2: Normalize having emojis in diagrams! :mega:

        SPPA["Supplier Address & <br> Revenue Shareholders"]
        DAOA["DAO Address"]
        SOA["Service Owner Address"]
        PRA["Proposer Address"]

        DI -->|"⬆️ INCREASE Balance <br> (% mint allocation)"| APPA
        DI -->|"⬆️ INCREASE Balance <br> (% mint allocation)"| DAOA
        DI -->|"⬆️ INCREASE Balance <br> (% mint allocation)"| PRA
        DI -->|"⬆️ INCREASE Balance <br> (% mint allocation)"| SOA
        DI -->|"⬆️ INCREASE Balance <br> (% mint allocation)"| SPPA
    end

    classDef module fill:#f9f,color: #333,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    classDef address fill:#bbf,color: #333,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    classDef question fill:#e3db6d,color: #333,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    classDef govparam fill:#eba69a,color: #333,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;
    classDef event fill:#e8b761,color: #333,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px;

    class TM module;
    class PCI,DA,PA,SMA,SOM,AA govparam;
    class APPA,SPPA,DAOA,SOA,PRA address;
```

## TLM: Global Mint Reimbursement Request (GMRR)

_tl;dr Prevent self-dealing by over-charging applications, sending the excess to the DAO/PNF, and emitting an event as a reimbursement request._

> ### Self Dealing Attack

Reviewer 2: :pray:

or if the global mint per claim governance parameter is set to zero.

The goal of the TLM is supplement the Global Mint TLM such that:

1. The application is overcharged by the inflation amount in `TLM: Global Mint`.
2. The application must **"show face"** in front of the DAO/PNF to request reimbursement.
3. PNF needs to **manually approve** the reimbursement request.

**While this is not perfect, it follows on the **[Deterrence Theory](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deterrence_(penology)>)** that
the increased risk of punishment will dissuade bad actors.**

_NOTE: A side effect of this TLM is creating additional buy pressure of the token as Applications
and Gateways will be responsible for frequently "topping up" their balances and app stakes._

```mermaid
---
title: "Token Logic Module: Global Mint Reimbursement Request"
---
flowchart TD
    SA(["Settlement Amount (SA)"])
    PCI(["Per Claim Global Inflation (PCGI)"])
    ARRE{{Application Reimbursement <br> Request Event}}
    TM2["Tokenomics Module"]

    subgraph TLMGM["TLM: Global Mint"]
        IA(["Inflation Mint Coin (IA)"])
        ID["Inflation Distribution <br> (see TLM above for details)"]

>         GP["Governance Params"]

Reviewer: Is there a reason that this node is not rounded like the other governance params?

```suggestion
        GP(["Governance Params"])
```

        subgraph TO[Tokenomics Operations]
            TM[[Tokenomics Module]]
            IA("IA = SA * PCGI <br> (IA: Inflation Amount)")
            TM  --> |"💲 MINT IA"|IA
        end

        %% Mint Inputs
        SA --> TO
        PCI --> TO

>         IA --> TO

Reviewer: Is this association intentional?

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b6a4aab2-96b8-4868-b23e-3cabb6ff66b5)

```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Additionally, it seems to alter the rendering in mermaid.live (but not github or the docusaurus site):

### With

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/95bdec62-3b1e-421b-affe-0e80854172a5)

### Without

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b88ed08a-2be2-43ec-8118-b8163e07b657)

Author: TY!

    participant BS as Blockchain State
    participant T as Tokenomics Module
    participant Apps as Applications 1..N

    PNF ->> +BS: Get All Reimbursement Requests
    BS ->> -PNF: List of Reimbursement Requests
    PNF ->> PNF: Review Reimbursement Requests
    loop "for each request"
        alt "Approve"
            PNF ->> T: Reimburse Application Funds
            T ->> Apps: Send Reimbursement
        else "Reject"
            note over PNF, Apps: PNF maintains funds
        end
    end
```

### FAQ

#### Is the application going to endorse the whole global mint amount (Including the supplier share)? <!-- omit in toc -->

The application `PAYS` the supplier for work done (i.e. Mint=Burn)
The application `GETS REIMBURSED` for the inflation (i.e. Global Mint)

#### Will there be any on-chain enforcement on the way application get reimbursed? Or do they just have to trust the DAO to reimburse them? <!-- omit in toc -->

No. They have to trust the DAO/PNF reimburses them.

This is similar to how we trust Gateways in Morse not to do self dealing.

#### How does this solution scale for sovereign applications? Do they have to show face too? <!-- omit in toc -->

> Correct.

Reviewer: I feel like this section needs to:
1. Rephrase or simplify the "question" 
AND/OR
1. Elaborate more in the "answer"

It seems like we're trying to make it clear that this applies to both gateways and sovereign applications. Perhaps adding a bit of detail that makes contact with why someone might believe otherwise would put it into better context.

#### Are we taking into account the resources needed to scale and automate reimbursement? (Event reader, tx submission, accounting...) <!-- omit in toc -->

- **On-chain**: load testing will show if events take up too much space. Unlikely to be an issue relative to proofs.

> - **Off-chain**: PNF Directors are aware of the operational overhead this will require and is okay with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Off-chain**: PNF Directors are aware and approve of the operational overhead this will require.
```

_tl;dr Yes, for the first version._

The application `PAYS` the supplier for work done (i.e. Mint=Burn).
The application `GETS REIMBURSED` for the inflation (i.e. Global Mint).

This will require staked Applications (sovereign or those managed by Gateways) to periodically
"top up" their balances to cover not only the on-chain costs/burn, but also the inflation
until it is reimbursed by the DAO/PNF.

#### Will there be on-chain enforcement of how Applications get reimbursed? <!-- omit in toc -->

_tl;dr Unfortunately, no._

They Applications will indeed have to trust the DAO/PNF to reimburse them.
The following is an example of the approach PNF could take.

1. Assume Application staking by Gateways is permissionless and done.
2. Applications pay on-chain for costs and inflation
3. PNF KYCs Gateways who seek reimbursement.
4. Gateways that don't go through the KYC process cover the cost of inflation
   out of pocket.
5. A script that retrieves on-chain reimbursement requests will be written that
   automatically send funds to previously KYCed gateways
6. The script above, and the trust that it'll be maintained, updated and executed

>    relies in the Gateways' trust in the PNF.

Author: Glad it helped!
